>>(SINGING) The more we get
together, together, together,
the more we get together
the happier we'll be,
the happier we'll be.
>> We have, in North
America particularly,
exalted personal independence
to an almost godlike state.
There is no higher
value than independence.
>> There is no higher value.
There is no higher--
almost godlike state, to
an almost godlike state.
>> Societies have become more
individualistic and people have
been more concerned
with themselves.
>> People now entertain
themselves alone, work alone,
are more fragmented,
more atomized.
>> I think it's difficult to
become part of a community when
you don't really know the
role that you want to play.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You can feel lonely
in a crowd of people.
You can have lots
of Facebook friends
and still feel
incredibly lonely.
>> Social isolation is the
medical equivalent of smoking
15 cigarettes a day.
It has the same impact
on health as diabetes.
>> There's so much
change going on.
I think it's very hard
for a lot of young people
to establish the kind
of roots and community
that we have in our
minds about what
a community should be about.
>> The level of social
isolation is very high.
>> And right now what I
see, it's getting bad,
it's going to get worse.
>> Can we as individuals be both
individualistic and communal?
That's the challenge
of our time.
>> Community well-being
I think means to me, God,
that's a really broad question.
I guess it's--
>> Think it out.
>> Yeah, it's--
>> How would you
answer that question?
Why am I even asking it.
I've been working in
the health profession
for over 10 years advising
my clients that health
is defined by two things--
what we eat and how
much we exercise.
But that assumption
changed after a trip
to the Blue
Mountains of Jamaica.
[INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
I stayed a few nights
in a small mountain
camp outfitted with just the
basics of simple village life.
The purpose of the
trip was to learn
from the local population
about food, nutrition,
and sustainable living.
But what really overwhelmed
me was the profound sense
of community.
Despite lacking
material possessions
that we value so greatly
in North America,
the people of this village
seemed happy, healthy,
and connected to one another.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This experience made me
wonder, how do people
feel about their sense of
community and connectedness?
And what, if any,
effect does this
have on our health and
overall well-being?
These questions
led me on a journey
to North American cities to
meet with locals, community
activists, and
leading authorities
on social, economic, and urban
planning to really understand
this topic, one that seems
so important, yet so rarely
discussed.
But here's the thing.
If we can't even answer the
question, what does community
well being mean to
us, then it seems
we are missing out
on something that
has the potential to
significantly improve
the quality of our lives.
>> Not that long ago, people
tended to live in extended
families more often.
Communities were closer knit.
People didn't travel
as far from their home.
You had not just your
parents nearby, but possibly
your grandparents
and aunts and uncles.
And so you had a network of
people very close to you.
>> We wouldn't have evolved
if we hadn't formed community,
and if we hadn't shared tasks,
and if we hadn't protected each
other.
We'd have been wiped out.
So we are, by nature, social
beings, social animals.
And I think we're denying a
part of what it is to be human
if we don't connect.
We know from the
evidence people who
are socially isolated,
they live shorter lives,
they live less healthy
lives than people
who are socially connected.
>> Extreme loneliness takes
a real toll on one's physical
being because it's so
draining, it's so tiring.
It's hard to get motivated,
it's hard to want
to take care of oneself.
It's probably a
form of depression.
Dr. Dean Ornish, the famous
cardiologist, his patients
would come back.
And those who had a sense
of community in their lives
seemed to live longer
and were healthier.
He did studies like
giving everyone a litmus
stick with a cold virus on it.
They would snuff it.
And then he would have
them fill out a form.
If you were diagnosed
with a terminal illness,
how many people would you share
that with in the first week?
And what was so interesting
is that if you would share it
with less than three
people, those individuals
had a 70% chance
of catching a cold,
and those that shared
it with seven or more
had like a 30% chance
of catching a cold.
>> How much do you feel like
you're connected to others?
How much do you feel like
you belong to others?
Are you wanted, needed, valued?
So almost every aspect of
our health and well-being
is affected by the quantity
and quality of our ties.
>> So isolation is one of the
most terrible things for human
beings.
If you think about--
in prison if you get sent
to solitary confinement,
that's one of the
worst punishments
that you can have
as a human being.
>> Over the last few decades,
experts have sounded alarms
about this epidemic
of loneliness.
The number of admittedly
lonely Americans across all age
demographics has doubled
in only 30 years,
from 30 million to
60 million people.
And another one third
of that same population
say they have trouble making
friends, with almost half
admitting they have no one or
just one person to confide in.
So what's happened to cause
this age of loneliness?
How did we get here?
How did we get so disconnected?
As it turns out, it has a
lot to do with things already
within our control.
Where we choose to live,
what we choose to value,
and how we choose
to spend our time.
>> So my dream home would like--
I would love to be in
the middle of the nature
with big house, open house.
>> So do we live
in our dream home?
I'd say, yes, except
for, particularly
from Elizabeth's perspective,
the sense of community
around the dream home.
I mean I think it
is fair to say that?
>> Yeah.
>> So you're saying you have
a good sense community or you
don't?
>> We have a medium
sense of community.
It's sort of a big house.
The neighbors are far away.
We have a park
across the street.
So we don't have
that tight feeling.
>> People love big houses
on quiet green patches,
and they are willing to
accept some of the trade-offs.
But they don't fully understand
some of the trade-offs.
Driving, economic impacts of
that lifestyle, time, obesity,
social disconnection,
those things
are becoming more clear
that suburban patterns
can create those problems.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you think about a village
300 years ago wherever that was,
people walked everywhere.
They maybe had a cart,
they maybe had a horse.
And so there was a natural
pattern of connectedness
and accessibility
to everything they
needed-- food, labor, and
entertainment, and everything
else.
>> I grew up in the UK.
I grew up in a little
village of 500 people
and took for granted
the fact that--
we had a shop just up the road.
We had greenspace
on our doorstep.
We knew our neighbors really
well along our street.
We had a church at
the top of the street.
So we had in this
ancient little village
almost a school, a place where
the community could congregate.
We had this incredible
mix of uses.
And you could almost live out
your daily life in that village
and not need to
go anywhere else.
>> But the car has made
it possible to travel huge
distances, to go
to edge conditions,
and live in beautiful forests.
But you can't provide
entertainment, shops,
services in the same way.
So people move around
a lot more and they
are locked into driving
more than anything else.
And in addition to
driving, which puts you
in a car, some people three
hours a day every day,
which you could use for family,
for work, or for health,
and sport, you're now in a car.
And what do you do in a car?
You sit and perhaps you eat.
And it's a different
impact on your health.
>> If you're in a car you're
surrounded and separated
by a whole bunch of metal.
You're very unlikely to
interact with the people
you see around you.
In fact, what you're
probably likely to do
is shout at the cyclist or
shout at the pedestrian who's
getting in your way right.
Whereas if you're in
transit or you're cycling
or you're walking,
you're much more
likely to have eye
contact with people.
Even if it's just
a casual glance,
there's a humanity about that
interaction and relationship,
which is not seen
when you're just
driving a car past each other.
>> Cities that grow in a sprawl
pattern have to build very
expensive sewer and
transportation and other forms
of infrastructure.
And then they disperse all
their economic activity
and their housing
and then people
have to drive around to get
the things they want and work.
And that leads to huge
pollution, energy use,
and health issues.
>> When I first came
to North America,
it was actually quite a shock
to see how separated uses were.
The fact that we build these
huge residential subdivisions,
we build these huge
commercial shopping malls,
industrial estates,
and they're separated
and just the volume
of traffic that generates, and
the fact that really it's very
difficult to walk anywhere.
We have to create ecological
cities where the impacts are
lower within the
cities themselves,
but also we're not
spreading as much
into the surrounding landscape
and the surrounding habitats.
>> If not designed well, suburbs
can lead to urban sprawl which
has a detrimental effect on both
the environment and our sense
of community.
While suburbs continue
to quickly expand,
they aren't the only
housing choice in demand.
Condominiums have become
a popular housing option
among both younger
and older generations.
They can offer proximity to
neighbors and accessibility
to services.
But can condo living provide
that feeling of community
that is so essential
to our well being?
To find out more
about this, I decided
to meet up with
someone who lives
in a populated urban area.
This is Kirsten.
She lives in a multi-unit
condo building in Vancouver.
Through our discussions,
she expressed
that despite being in
a safe neighborhood
and having modern amenities in
her building, she rarely sees,
let alone interacts
with her neighbors.
As a result, feels
like the building
lacks a sense of community.
>> It's nice to know people when
you're walking down the street
and have interesting
conversations and sort of be
more connected to your community
rather than just coming
in and coming out going
to different places,
living your busy
day-to-day life.
>> In itself, condominiums
are not the answer.
And, in fact, they can be part
of the problem of isolation.
But designed well, they can
be part of the solution.
So it really is a
question of the quality
of design both of
the building itself,
how it relates to the
street and how it relates
to its surrounding open space.
There's very little
space for people
to interact in that kind of
typical apartment building
or condominium building.
So you come out, you've got
this very black bear corridor,
you walk to the elevator,
you're down to the parking lot
usually, you're in your car,
and then you're off to work.
And so there are
very few places that
are designed for intentionally
congregating and mixing
and bumping into people.
>> I don't know that we've
designed our high rises well
enough to encourage
that form of community.
Often people see each
other as kind of they
have to line up behind others
to get on the elevator.
And we don't have the right
kind of common spaces.
Even if you wanted to
borrow sugar from the person
downstairs, you have to phone in
and get security clearance just
to go down to the
next door neighbor.
>> We've heard the thing,
fences make great neighbors.
And it's kind of like as long
as I know what my space is,
I'll interact and
engage with you.
But you've got to know my space.
And I wonder if an apartment
that doesn't work that way.
>> We're not imposing solitary
confinement on people,
but we are designing places that
make it difficult to interact
with people, which amounts
to a similar thing.
So through design we're
creating isolation
and we're creating separation.
>> I ask people, how many
of you know your neighbor?
There it's usually about a
half now their neighbors.
I ask, how many of you know
the last name of your neighbor?
And it's probably 10%.
>> Would you happen to know
any of your neighbors on that
street?
>> I do not at this point.
I've lived there
for about six weeks,
and I know the gentleman
that lives below me.
That's about it.
>> In my apartment building,
people don't even like make eye
contact with me.
When I pass them
at the hall, they
look away instead of trying
to even give a basic greeting.
>> Even the further you go up,
the further high you're living,
the further detached you
are from your community,
for example, or
anybody around you.
>> It's very important, I
think, that sense of community
and the security that brings
when you know people who are
around you.
>> What do you mean by security?
>> If you don't
know your neighbors,
you don't know what
kind of people they are.
>> I don't even think I'm
going to live in this community
for more than a year or two.
So maybe when I'm
a little bit older,
I have a family, kids,
and everything else,
then it'll be important.
But for right now,
I'd rather just
communicate with the people
that I find important in life
rather than helping
a community or trying
to work on a community
that I might not even
live in in a year from now.
>> I mean, Winston
Churchill famously said,
we shape our buildings, and
then our buildings shape us.
The same is true of our
cities and our neighborhoods.
We shape our neighborhoods.
We shape our cities, and then
our cities shape us back.
And so in many
ways, our cities are
a reflection of our thinking and
our culture and our paradigms,
if you like, about
how we see the world
and how we see our relationship
amongst each other.
>> We no longer
have front porches.
Now, I don't know
why that happened.
Was it the garage that took over
the front porch and the fact
that people like to just drive
in, close the door behind them?
But what that means is that
when people are going for walks,
they don't see one
another anymore.
Front yards are
often just lawns.
Our backyards are where we
often create the greatest oasis,
and so we don't-- we don't have
a natural connection with one
another.
And then eventually, other
things start to break down.
>> If you feel connected to your
neighborhood, to your place,
you feel like it's
your community.
If you don't feel
connected to it,
you feel like it's just
a place where you live.
If you feel connected to the
people in that neighborhood,
you feel like those
people are your community.
If you don't, you probably
feel like your community
are actually a group
of people spread
throughout the city who are
your friends and acquaintances.
>> And you're seeing this
renewal all around the world
where neighborhoods are
becoming far more important,
both in city planning but also
just citizens saying I want
to know my neighbor.
I want to be in a
neighborhood that's safe.
place that's fun.
And it's good for me.
It's great for my
kids and guess what
neighborhoods with a sense of
community land values go up.
>> Lots of people
are realizing that.
And what's happening is
actually those places
are becoming more expensive.
They're becoming gentrified.
They're becoming the most
popular spaces in cities.
We're actually underproviding
those kind of places
right now in a big way.
And it's what's driving
the lack of affordability
in many of our world
cities like Vancouver,
like San Francisco,
like New York,
London because people
are really demanding
the neighborhoods that
are mixed use and have
that public amenity, that
public open space, and then
great urban design.
>> We've been looking at houses.
And like why be in this little
cookie-cutter neighborhood
where maybe you're like--
>> Two people in a
6,000 square foot house?
>> Yeah, it's ridiculous.
>> It's completely ridiculous.
>> But it's like no
one needs that space,
but you need people.
>> Although we are
social beings by nature,
it's been reported that one
third of Americans never reach
out to their neighbors, and more
and more people are choosing
to live alone.
Since the design
of our communities
can hinder opportunities for
interaction, which negatively
affects our being, it
becomes vitally important
that we create our
own opportunities
to connect with others.
>> Being a part of one's
community is very rewarding,
but it can also--
it's not-- it's not
always easy to get
involved when you yourself
have been at the outskirts.
But I do think that's one
of the most reliable routes
to happiness.
>> When I move into a condo,
I'm going to organize my floor
first, and then I'm going to
start to organize the whole
building.
But if I can get
my floor organized
and people hear us having
fun and suddenly they
hear from others, gee, if
you lived on floor nine, what
a great time you'd
have, I wish I
could have that kind of floor.
That's what I think
it takes, ultimately.
>> I think that there's a lot
of interesting people here that
I'd like to get to know more,
and I think that we kind
of take for granted the
situation that we live
in because I think that
the building is so cool.
The rooftop is so cool.
If we could have monthly
gatherings or more
regular get-togethers I think
that would be really nice.
>> Surveys report that
when buying a condo,
amenities like rooftop patios
and party rooms are in high
demand.
But how often do we
really see these spaces
being used to socialize?
Wanting to help Kirsten to
get to know her neighbors
and wanting to make use of
the building's common spaces,
I convinced her to throw a party
on the rooftop of her condo.
>> Kirsten, how are you?
It's Tamaran.
How are you doing?
How are you feeling
about the dates?
Which date worked
better for you?
And let's take it from that?
Essentially, you invite
people, and they just come.
And it can be like
standing room.
And people can then just mingle.
Kirsten, can I tell you how
thankful we are for this?
It's going to be awesome.
Woo.
We got a candidate.
Kirsten was up for the
challenge of taking
the first step to meeting her
neighbors, which is admirable.
But the big question is, will
the people in our building
be willing to come out
and get to one another?
Most of us would say
we enjoy socializing,
yet we don't make it a priority.
Studies show that families are
having 60% fewer family picnics
and 40% fewer family dinners
than just a few decades ago.
In the late '70s,
the average American
entertained friends at
home about 14 times a year.
Now, it's half that.
While it's true that many of
us commute and work more hours
than we did in the
past, some stats
showing that almost
all professionals work
at least 50 hours a
week, and nearly half
work more than 65 hours.
There's a greater
issue here, one
that's concerned with
how we value our time.
Throughout the 19th century, the
ability to afford leisure time
was a badge of honor.
Now, that badge
has been replaced
with shackles of busyness.
>> Like you want to go
and visit with friends.
Like you've got a book
two months in advance.
Like they might only
live 10 minutes away.
So the challenge has really been
how can you create community
in a very fast-paced
environment that
has a lot of external
stresses on it?
Now, it's probably true
over the last 40 years
that societies have become
more individualistic,
and people have been more
concerned with themselves
doing something.
This is my time developing
something for me
and defining it often in terms
of things, incomes, capacity
to achieve, getting houses,
getting cars, and so on,
defining success that way,
in part, because that's
the way the commercial
economy, in part, is set up
in order to make it look like
you'll be happier if you've
got a car that can sit
on a mountaintop or any
of these other things or go
on a fancy cruise or whatever.
And I think that levees
a cost on people.
>> The notion of Independence
comes from greater affluence
in Western society.
Every time we become
more affluent,
we use it to purchase
greater independence.
So independence is kind of
the offshoot of affluence,
and our increasing affluence,
increasing independence moves
us into greater and
greater isolation.
>> Money and making more money
helps us live a better life
to a point, but connectedness
actually drives happiness
on a direct line.
The more you know people,
the more connected
you are to your
friends and neighbors.
The happier you are.
And it's a direct connection.
And in many societies,
increased income
actually leads to social
isolation, stress,
and ill health.
So actually, happiness drops.
>> When people are asked, what
are your most rewarding aspects
of life, people recognize
it's the social relationships.
But when push comes
to shove, I think
when people are making decisions
about their time, day-to-day,
we don't always stack our
time in that same manner.
>> All the money that I have
isn't going to deal with
the most fundamental need that
I'm going to have when I get
old, and that is connection.
My god, who's going to come
visit me when I'm sick?
Just think about
that for a moment.
You know, when I'm most
vulnerable, when I'm dying.
And the investment that
you put in today, just
like financial planning, it
will reap you so many awards
going into your future.
It's a lovely analogy.
I'm not saying don't plan
financially, but just
think about your future without
community, without friends.
>> It seems that by placing
importance on our drive
for wealth and status, by
having a time as money mindset,
we are inadvertently using
a rise in income to purchase
loneliness.
And taking it one step further,
how we generate this income
and grow our economies
can have a negative impact
on our society as a whole.
>> When Simon Kuznets, who
was one of the lead architects
of the GDP in the
1930s, developed it,
he said to the US Senate that it
shouldn't be used as a measure
of social progress, and yet
that's exactly what we do.
So what we're interested
in is how do you grow all
those other things that matter?
One way to think about
it is that there's
different forms of capital.
So we talk about
economic capital.
And everybody thinks
that capitalism
is about economic capital,
but the green or alternative
economists would tell
you that there's at least
three other forms of capital.
There's human capital.
What are my assets, capacity,
abilities, and collectively,
what's our assets,
capacities, and abilities?
Then there's social
capital, which
is about how we interact with
each other, the social networks
that we build, the social
systems that we build.
And then there's
natural capital,
which is nature of
the resources, the way
our ecosystems function.
In the 21st century,
real capitalism
is about building all four forms
of capital at the same time.
And we have a rather
distorted version of capital
that says that we're only
going to grow economic capital.
That's all that matters.
In the process, we damage
or destroy natural capital.
We damage or destroy
social capital.
When you look at what's happened
to the outsourcing of jobs
to the destruction of
businesses to the destruction
of communities in the
pursuit of economic capital,
and then we harm
individuals because we're
harming human capital when
we destroy social capital
or natural capital.
So we're growing
one form of capital
at the expense of the others.
Well, I'm sorry, but
that's very antiquated
19th-century economic thinking.
It doesn't work in
the 21st century.
And so real capitalism is
about how do you simultaneously
build human, social, natural,
and economic capital?
And if you can't do that,
you're not a real capitalist
in the 21st century.
>> Kirsten, what's happening?
>> [VOCALIZING]
>> How are you doing?
>> Good to see you again.
>> You all right?
Should we stop for this?
>> I think so.
>> Think so?
>> Yeah
>> Ready to go.
>> OK, good.
I love your confidence.
>> So she said you're
invited to an autumn harvest.
We're inviting all our neighbors
to a gathering on the roof
from 5:00 to 7:00 this Sunday.
Stop by for drinks and bites and
a chance to meet some people.
We are personally inviting
everyone on floor 5
as we are in unit 511.
However, everyone in
the building is invited.
And please feel free to
bring a couple of friends.
Hope to see you there.
>> That's excellent.
That's great.
So what do you think you think?
People are going to come?
>> I hope so.
>> When I went to university,
everyone was part of this big
community because we were
all going to school together.
So there was a reason to go
to parties together and have
dinners together and
this kind of thing.
Whereas I feel
like more and more
nowadays, if you go out with
work people, that's one thing.
If you go out with people
that you've been friends with,
that's one thing.
But it's harder to get a
sense of community in maybe
where you live.
Maybe there's
small conversations
in the elevators like that.
But it's not that
people aren't nice.
Everyone's smiling.
And how's your day going
and that sort of thing.
But there's never really
more of a sense of community.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you travel in the
same elevators I travel
in, the phones are
destroying the elevator.
I mean, the old days,
people met on the streets
then and then say hello.
And you'd meet and greet.
In an up and down
high-rise city,
those city streets
are the elevators.
But how can you, in an
elevator ride, regarded by many
as a short-term prison
sentence, should
really be regarded as a social
event waiting to happen?
It's very hard to get
that social event started
if everybody is there
facing their phone
because you feel you're
interrupting them
by starting a conversation.
>> An 18-year-old boy who uses
texting for almost everything
says to me wistfully, someday,
someday, but certainly not now,
I'd like to learn how
to have a conversation.
When I ask people, what's wrong
with having a conversation?
People say, I'll tell you
what's wrong with having
a conversation.
It takes place in real
time, and you can't control
what you're going to say.
>> Going out for
dinner and things,
everyone will be on their
phone at a certain time,
and we laugh it off.
But you know, what
conversations are we missing?
What emotions are we missing?
What could be maybe
not communicated
because we're spending time
on our phone or something
like that?
>> Parents text and do email at
breakfast and at dinner while
their children complain about
not having their parents' full
attention.
But then these same
children deny each other
their full attention.
>> Studies reveal that we check
our phones anywhere from 47
to 82 times a day.
We bring them
everywhere with us,
from the breakfast table to
the bedroom, which intrudes
on our real-life interactions.
One study reported
that 70% of women
believe that smartphones
were negatively
impacting their relationships.
There's even a term for
this interference fubbing,
which is defined as snubbing
a person in favor of a phone.
To no one's surprise, the
more we engage in fubbing,
the less available we are
to the people around us.
And the same can be true
for online interactions.
As Sherry Turkle
states, the ties
we form through the
internet are not
in the end the ties that bind.
>> Texting, email, posting, all
of these things let us present
the self as we want to be.
We get to edit, and that
means we get to delete.
And that means we get to retouch
the face, the voice, the flesh,
the body, not too little,
not too much, just right.
>> Lots of people want to
showcase themselves through
social media.
So they build up this
persona of themselves,
and they spend a
lot of time crafting
that persona of
themselves rather than
actually going out and meeting
people and doing things.
I think that while it's really
nice to be connected to people
in different cities,
like family and friends,
it's not as beneficial to the
people that are around you
if you're stuck communicating to
people that are not around you.
>> A lot of the interaction
online is also very brief 10,
20, 30 seconds, a
few minutes, maybe.
It's not like sitting down
and having lunch or going
to the pub and having
a beer where you spend
a couple of hours together.
>> Over and over, I hear I
would rather text than talk.
And what I'm seeing is
that people get so used
to being shortchanged
out of real conversation,
so used to getting by
with less that they
become almost
willing to dispense
with people altogether.
>> When you spend less time
interacting face to face with
individuals, you sort of-- if
we think about that interaction
as a form of exercise that helps
us know how to communicate with
the other-- each other and
keep that communication working
in a healthy way, then we're
not getting as much of that
exercise as maybe we need.
And so I do worry, particularly
for younger generations.
Are they getting
that social exercise
that they need to learn
how to communicate
with others in the world?
>> We did have the advantage
of getting use of a very large
Canadian survey.
And they were asked how big is
their network of real friends,
and they were asked how
big is their network
of online friends.
And there was a significant
dose response relationship
of a positive sort
for real friends.
The bigger your
network, the more
satisfied you were with
your life as a whole.
The effect of the online friends
was either zero or negative.
And now, the negative one,
you say, how could that be?
One part it's like
watching television.
You may like to watch television
and get something out of it,
but once you get into it,
it's hard to get out of it.
And then you're finished
the day watching television.
You've lost all the
opportunity you otherwise had
to have fun with real people.
>> I think it can be a tool
for creating community.
But I don't think it's
the basis of community.
I think it's very hard
for us as human beings
to stop with social media.
I think we do better
when we kind of at least
see facial contact,
facial recognition,
even if it is on a screen.
Making eye contact with somebody
and seeing facial expression,
seeing gestures is a
very important part
of our experience of community
and our experience of humanity.
And I think one of the
challenges with social media
has been we can talk to the
people who agree with us too
much, that we can isolate
ourselves into a community
where we're all talking
about the same thing
and agreeing with each other
rather than maybe having
differences of opinion and
learning from those differences
and becoming more
mature and adult
through those interactions
and differences.
So I think that's one of
the things I worry about
with social media and
the isolation it creates
is that we're going to become
less adult, less informed, less
human because of that lack of--
that lack of interaction.
>> Watching some of the
conversations that within two
or three comments from something
really interesting to something
disrespectful and it doesn't
seem to weigh away within
the culture yet to
keep it positive,
to keep the discussions
going in a way that enhances
people's connections
rather than destroys them.
>> So I am a big proponent
of people actually being able
to look each other in the eye in
a social situation on a street
because I do think there is
something profound about that
eye contact that helps you
understand and empathize with
another human being that maybe
is lost even with social media
with a screen experience.
>> Over the past 15 years, I've
studied technologies of mobile
communication.
And I've interviewed hundreds
and hundreds of people,
young and old, about
their plugged-in lives.
And what I've found is
that our little devices,
those little devices
in our pockets,
are so psychologically
powerful that they don't only
change what we do.
They change who we are.
>> Technology has kind of
stripped away everything that
we would think of as far as
having day-to-day community.
There's not going to be any
more coming to the coffee shop
and just sit.
If you walk into a
coffee shop right now,
there's small groups of people
sitting close to each other,
looking at their phones,
and everyone else just
has their computer
in front of them.
>> Becoming immersed in
our own echo chambers,
our own curated online world
can lead to real-life community
breakdown.
We rarely interact
online with those
who are different
from us, and this
can contribute to
social ignorance
and foster mistrust in others.
Trust is an essential
component of happiness.
Research tells us
that the more we
feel we can trust those around
us, ranging from our neighbors
to complete strangers, the
more life satisfaction we have.
Intrigued by this question
of how much we trust those
around us, researcher
John Helliwell
often includes this question
in his happiness surveys.
If you dropped your
wallet, how likely
is it that it would
be returned to you?
>> Almost nil.
>> I'd say 50/50.
It could go either way
depending on who will find it.
>> No, I don't think so.
I don't think so.
[SPEAKING SIMULTANEOUSLY]
>> Neighborhood dependent.
>> Yeah.
>> Highly unlikely.
>> Highly unlikely?
>> Like 20%.
>> 5%.
>> You wouldn't get it back.
>> Yeah, not likely.
>> I don't know.
I want to expect the
best from people.
And I think it's
important as well
to have that state of mind.
That's what makes a
community, basically.
It's the spirit,
but I'm not sure
if-- it depends on the person.
>> It's someone in an experiment
to gauge the level of honesty
and trust in a big city in
2009, the "Toronto Star"
dropped 20 wallets around the
greater Toronto area and waited
to see how many
would be returned.
Each wallet contained $43.77,
a photo ID, a phone number,
some pictures, and a grocery
list, amongst other things.
The results were fascinating.
>> So 23% thought it
would be returned.
80% of the wallets
were returned.
So I often say we're just
shooting ourselves in our foot
by thinking as ill of our
fellow men and woman as we do.
And why is that?
And one reason is that
what you read in the media,
in fact, is about this
is supposed to be,
in fact, what they still
teach in journalism schools is
that bad news sells.
So bad news is when
bad people do something
bad to other
people, and then you
begin to think it's
much more common than it
is because that's all
the newspapers are about.
You don't read about the
good turns people do.
So you underestimate
the ability of other,
and that's terribly destructive
of social relations,
terribly destructive
of happiness,
got to be turned around.
>> Fear is our most
basic human emotion.
And so to appeal to
fear is obviously
a very effective strategy.
And we have sort of
a natural inclination
to also group and to distinguish
whether someone's in my group
or not in my group.
And so when we use fear to
sort of promote that tendency,
that can be quite problematic.
>> So you're excited.
How do you think
your neighbors are
going to feel coming
together and interacting
with each other?
>> I think it's going to be
a really valuable experience
for everyone.
I don't really know
the level of knowing
people have of each
other in the building,
so it'll be a good
experiment for me
to see how everyone interacts.
And yeah, I'm excited.
What do you say?
Let's just backtrack to
the individual person.
Let's say, right
now, there's somebody
who's feeling less
community oriented,
feeling socially
isolated, feeling
like their social
networks have dwindled.
What do you tell
that person to do?
>> I think it's mostly to
try to get a sense of how
they're spending their time now.
Are they in the
right neighborhood?
Is it a place that that's
where they can find enough time
to reach out to others?
And what are the
institutions where
they may be able to meet
others or serve others?
>> I think sport is this
absolutely incredibly important
element of our society.
And I think we can't--
I can't overemphasize the
importance of the recreation
department in a city
and their ability
to get people to get out
there and play together.
It's a wonderful way to
build a sense of community.
It's a wonderful way
to keep people healthy.
>> A lot of folks who work in
sort of the social development
field would suggest that you
want to limit screen time.
You want to limit the
use of electronic devices
and make sure that there
is family time that
allows for actual
social interaction,
face-to-face interaction.
>> Maybe it means that I'm going
to go back and join a faith
community like I had as a kid.
It's definitely going
to mean that I'm
going to get to
know my neighbors
and hang out with
them because I want
it to be a safe
neighborhood, first of all.
But I want them to get to know.
And my extended family, we're
going to that Thanksgiving.
We're going to that Christmas.
We're celebrating
everybody's birthdays.
It's just because it's--
we're creating that
with extended friends
because my kids are going
to be way better off.
>> Sadly but true, all the
negativity that's going out,
it's bringing factions together
on both sides or whatever.
But people who have different
what they now call--
cutely call intersectionality
or whatever.
It's like, OK, well,
I'm broke and Black,
but you're broke and gay.
And you're rich, but
you're gay and Black.
And like there's some
shit here that all of us
are having to come together
to some extent and kind of--
I won't say battle but continue
with or at least address
together.
>> It's more than just going
off to meet your friends
in the pub.
It is are you
engaged with others
in trying to make your
community a better place?
>> Volunteer work, that is
something that can be a family
activity.
So I think it's
vitally important
that parents and
families are models
of how to be a good
citizen in the world.
>> We've been talking to so many
not-for-profit organizations
and saying, look,
altruism is one thing.
Collective altruism
is a whole nother.
And collective
altruism is when you
see a group of people who
are now acting together
on behalf of something better.
>> Right, absolutely.
>> And so they're bringing
their collective together.
And now, when they open
themselves to the other--
so they open themselves
to the other,
but they're opening
themselves to each other.
>> When we give three hours or
a day to somewhere that needs
help, be it a food shelter,
be it picking up garbage,
a shoreline, planting
trees, helping with garbage,
just anything that's needed
around the community that we
come out and donate our
time, NSAP says, you guys,
go away for three hours, still
getting paid to go help with
the community and
say, we can do this.
So right now, we have about 80
people on the beach right now,
the shoreline, cleaning up
Jericho and Spanish banks just
to give back to the
community that we live in.
You ever heard of
Habitat for Humanity?
I nickname it the Habitat
for Humanity effect.
You've never had a Habitat
volunteer kind of leave a build
saying, oh, my god.
That was so much work.
I just hated it.
They're all smiling, the ones I
interview, and they're leaving.
And they're saying, I
got way more out of this
than I ever put into it.
It's a beautiful thing.
>> I would be remiss to say
that we only have a prosocial
instinct.
I think we as humans also
have a selfish instinct.
But I think one of the beautiful
features about human behavior
is that we feel good
when we give probably
because it's been advantageous
for us to get along
with others.
>> They underestimate the
happiness they'll get from
doing something with good
purpose with others for others.
The best purpose
is one that either
will make a better environment
for future generations
or make life better for people
you're dealing with right now.
Or it may be cleaning
up this beach
or cleaning up
this neighborhood.
Or maybe what can we
do to actually help
some disadvantaged
community to get
a greater purchase on the
future by us getting involved
directly?
>> Studies show that when we
live in a place surrounded
by greenery, our neighbors tend
to be more generous, trusting,
sociable, and most importantly,
have a greater sense
of belonging and a heightened
willingness to help others.
Unfortunately, the
opposite is also true.
In environments
that lack greenery,
we find higher rates of
aggression, violence, crime,
a lack of social support,
and increased loneliness,
elements that greatly affect
our sense of belonging
and therefore our well-being.
>> I live in South Central.
This is South Central--
liquor stores, fast
food, vacant lots.
So the city planners,
they get together,
and they figure they're going
to change the name South
Central to make it
represent something else.
So they change it to
South Los Angeles.
Like this is going to fix what's
really going wrong in the city.
This is South Los Angeles--
liquor store, fast
food, vacant lots.
>> Imagine if you see
ugly all day long.
Every day, all you see is ugly.
All you see is despair, and you
don't even know it's despair
because that's your normal.
Now imagine you wake
up in the morning,
and you pull your curtain back.
And you get to see
this beautiful vista
with green meadows and beautiful
flowers and hummingbirds
at your window and
butterflies in your bedroom
and this beautiful art
hanging around you.
And everywhere you go is art.
And you walk down the street.
Everybody's line is lush
and green and plants.
And everything around
you is beautiful.
Imagine how you think
that's going to affect you.
It's going to change it.
>> Ron Finley is a
community activist,
also known as the
Gangster Gardener.
He spent the last
decade teaching people
about the power of
community gardens
and encouraging the people
of South Los Angeles
to grow their own food,
not only to provide access
to local healthy food but also
to beautify their surroundings
and build a sense of community.
>> The thing with this garden is
gardening period is it's common
ground.
They bring people together.
And that's what I wanted to do.
That was one of my intents.
I wanted to get people of
different cultures in a garden
together because these
people grow this red thing,
and these people grow
these purple things
that we've never seen.
And these people grow this.
And so I think if we all
mesh our communities.
We mesh our food.
We mesh our cultures.
That's what I want
to see happen.
>> Well, it's 5 to 5:00.
And there's no people here yet,
but I'm still very hopeful.
We have a two-hour window,
so that gives them some time
to come up and
hopefully grab a bite
and some drinks because
we have a good spread.
I'm a little nervous
and excited because I
haven't met a lot of
people in the building.
So I'm just hoping that I get
to meet some of them tonight.
>> What do you think?
Do you think you're going
to get to meet anyone?
>> Yeah, I'm still hopeful.
It's a Sunday.
It's not raining.
And what better things
do people have to do?
It's a party on the roof.
>> It's like someone makes the
effort to try and connect with
people in their building.
It's like you just
hope people come.
>> It's been shown time and time
again that sharing food builds
relationships.
Professor and
sociologist Alice Julia
argues that those who share food
with a diverse group of people
tend to view different
races, genders,
and socioeconomic backgrounds,
as more equal than they would
in other social scenarios.
Essentially, the simple act
of sharing a meal with others
can make you a more open
and accepting person
and offer an
opportunity to connect
with a variety of
different people.
>> I think when I moved to
Vancouver three years ago,
I felt that it was harder
to find my own community.
It was hard to know where I can
make those connections where
I felt like I was
growing my friend circle
and building long-lasting
relationships,
and I start to find
that through food.
Food is something
we all do every day.
So whether it's cooking
a meal with somebody
or learning to grow
food with other people,
I felt it was a great
way to bridge those gaps
and make those
connections easier.
>> Food is often a way to
communicate with people when
you can't communicate with
them through language.
I was telling you earlier
about our neighbors
down the street, the
Al-Khateeb family, and the mom,
in particular, she
didn't speak any English
but was a very generous,
hospitable person.
And so as a way of getting
to know each other,
we would sort of
exchange food gifts.
And I think she was so happy
for the welcome she had received
in this neighborhood that the
best way she knew how to say
thank you is to
bring over gifts.
And she'd bring over
traditional Arab delicacies.
So we started doing
food exchanges,
and I think it was a way for us
to bond even though we couldn't
speak very well together.
>> We want to welcome newcomers.
We want to grapple with
different culture beliefs
and needs and be welcoming.
So how do you do that if you
don't involve those people,
ask them questions,
understand their needs?
>> I think there's a tendency
for us to be with people who
are like us.
And that's probably
a very human thing.
But we live in the 21st century.
We can enjoy other cultures.
And we can understand
what's good about them
and what learn from
them because we
live in a highly diverse world,
and shutting yourself off
from it is actually
to shut yourself off
from a lot of enrichment.
>> Maybe it's better not to
cocoon yourself all the time
with the known friends and
comfortable zones you have,
but to think about reaching out
to others outside the comfort
zone.
In a way, that's
the central message
I have really is to go
outside your comfort zone,
even if your comfort
zone is pretty
well connected and friendly.
>> Well, guys.
It's 5:30.
No one is here.
So I'm thinking I'm going
to go knock on some doors
and see why people aren't
coming because we have lots
of good food and
good drinks, and they
should be enjoying it with us.
>> Well, speak of the devil.
There's someone coming.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Living alone has made me
reach out a bit more and come
to events like this on
Sunday and stuff like that.
>> I got this invitation.
I said, oh, that's nice
person, an invitation.
I said, I'm going to grow up
a bit and meet my neighbors.
>> Yeah, I mean, it's great.
It's nice to come up here
and meet some people,
see some people
maybe you've seen
around the condo or
the apartment building
and get a name to a face.
>> I really feel good, and I
feel like we should have this
more often.
It's a really nice idea.
I'm surprised we didn't have
this before, a good way to meet
your meet your neighbors.
>> Arash and I were just saying
that we definitely want to host
another event for the building.
Like maybe I don't
know winter, if there
is a room in there that we
could use or something like that
or do something in the summer.
But we definitely said that
we want more events like this.
What do you guys think?
>> Yeah, definitely.
Definitely summertime.
>> Yeah.
>> While there are many
things that can keep us apart,
we need to focus
on coming together.
I believe that Professor
Margaret J. Wheatley sums it
up best by saying, when
we seek for connection,
we restore the
world to wholeness.
Our seemingly
separate lives become
meaningful as we discover
how truly necessary
we are to each other.
>> I somehow sense that when
you're in right relationship
to the world around
you that you are well.
That probably means
how you show up
in terms of your footprint on
this Earth, how you show up
to your neighbors,
and that ultimately,
that wellness has to do with--
and well being has to do with
almost like a state of being.
>> Ask yourself, how am I doing?
And if you don't like the
answer to that question,
then to make a plan to be
more connected to others.
>> Just beautify
your surroundings,
and that will beautify you.
And that will beautify
everything else,
people around you.
>> So we need to tap
into that energy,
which means stepping
away from our screens.
It means stepping outside
of our front door.
>> Let's not waste
each other's time.
Let's not waste our time.
Let's together do something
to improve the community.
>> We haven't met
enough of our neighbors,
and people want to be
more of our neighbors.
So I think that this
is just the beginning
of more and more events
like this for our building.
>> We're actually starting
to design for interaction.
We're starting to think about
public space, gathering,
celebration, and just
random interactions
that people have and
can just say hello
to each other on the street.
>> On my journey from the
mountains of Jamaica to cities
across North America, one
thing has become clear.
Eating well and exercising
are two critical components
of a healthy lifestyle, but
they're not the only ones.
In order to achieve true
health, physical, emotional,
and social, we need
to come together.
Devoting time, effort, and
energy into your community
is one of the most
solid investments
you can make because
the more you give,
the more you'll get back.
And what you stand
to gain is priceless.
>> You've heard Nelson
Mandela say [NON-ENGLISH]..
I am because of you.
My identity exists
because of you.
Through your eyes, you are
the one who shapes who I am.
And so it basically means that
for him, we are all connected.
[MUSIC PLAYING]